<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
<head>
<title>First Act</title>
<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
<section id="act-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
<h2>First Act</h2>



<h2>FIRST ACT</h2>

<h3>SCENE</h3>

<p><i>The octagon room at Sir Robert Chiltern’s house in
Grosvenor Square</i>.</p>

<p>[<i>The room is brilliantly lighted and full of
guests</i>. <i>At the top of the staircase stands</i> <span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>, <i>a woman of grave Greek
beauty</i>, <i>about twenty-seven years of age</i>. <i>She
receives the guests as they come up</i>. <i>Over the well
of the staircase hangs a great chandelier with wax lights</i>,
<i>which illumine a large eighteenth-century French
tapestry—representing the Triumph of Love</i>, <i>from a
design by Boucher—that is stretched on the staircase
wall</i>. <i>On the right is the entrance to the
music-room</i>. <i>The sound of a string quartette is
faintly heard</i>. <i>The entrance on the left leads to
other reception-rooms</i>. <span class="smcap">mrs.
marchmont</span> <i>and</i> <span class="smcap">lady
basildon</span>, <i>two very pretty women</i>, <i>are seated
together on a Louis Seize sofa</i>. <i>They are types of
exquisite fragility</i>. <i>Their affectation of manner has
a delicate charm</i>. <i>Watteau would have loved to paint
them</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. marchmont</span>. Going on to
the Hartlocks’ to-night, Margaret?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady basildon</span>. I suppose
so. Are you?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. marchmont</span>. Yes.
Horribly tedious parties they give, don’t they?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady basildon</span>. Horribly
tedious! Never know why I go. Never know why I go
anywhere.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. marchmont</span>. I come here
to be educated.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady basildon</span>. Ah! I hate
being educated!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. marchmont</span>. So do
I. It puts one almost on a level with the commercial
classes, doesn’t it? But dear Gertrude Chiltern is
always telling me that I should have some serious purpose in
life. So I come here to try to find one.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady basildon</span>. [<i>Looking
round through her lorgnette</i>.] I don’t see anybody
here to-night whom one could possibly call a serious
purpose. The man who took me in to dinner talked to me
about his wife the whole time.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. marchmont</span>. How very
trivial of him!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady basildon</span>. Terribly
trivial! What did your man talk about?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. marchmont</span>. About
myself.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady basildon</span>.
[<i>Languidly</i>.] And were you interested?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. marchmont</span>. [<i>Shaking
her head</i>.] Not in the smallest degree.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady basildon</span>. What martyrs
we are, dear Margaret!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. marchmont</span>.
[<i>Rising</i>.] And how well it becomes us, Olivia!</p>

<p>[<i>They rise and go towards the music-room</i>.
<i>The</i> <span class="smcap">vicomte de nanjac</span>, <i>a
young attaché known for his neckties and his
Anglomania</i>, <i>approaches with a low bow</i>, <i>and enters
into conversation</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mason</span>. [<i>Announcing guests
from the top of the staircase</i>.] Mr. and Lady Jane
Barford. Lord Caversham.</p>

<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">lord caversham</span>, <i>an
old gentleman of seventy</i>, <i>wearing the riband and star of
the Garter</i>. <i>A fine Whig type</i>. <i>Rather
like a portrait by Lawrence</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord caversham</span>. Good evening,
Lady Chiltern! Has my good-for-nothing young son been
here?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>.
[<i>Smiling</i>.] I don’t think Lord Goring has
arrived yet.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. [<i>Coming up
to</i> <span class="smcap">lord caversham</span>.] Why do
you call Lord Goring good-for-nothing?</p>

<p>[<span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span> <i>is a perfect
example of the English type of prettiness</i>, <i>the
apple-blossom type</i>. <i>She has all the fragrance and
freedom of a flower</i>. <i>There is ripple after ripple of
sunlight in her hair</i>, <i>and the little mouth</i>, <i>with
its parted lips</i>, <i>is expectant</i>, <i>like the mouth of a
child</i>. <i>She has the fascinating tyranny of youth</i>,
<i>and the astonishing courage of innocence</i>. <i>To sane
people she is not reminiscent of any work of art</i>.
<i>But she is really like a Tanagra statuette</i>, <i>and would
be rather annoyed if she were told so</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord caversham</span>. Because he
leads such an idle life.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. How can you
say such a thing? Why, he rides in the Row at ten
o’clock in the morning, goes to the Opera three times a
week, changes his clothes at least five times a day, and dines
out every night of the season. You don’t call that
leading an idle life, do you?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord caversham</span>. [<i>Looking
at her with a kindly twinkle in his eyes</i>.] You are a
very charming young lady!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. How sweet of
you to say that, Lord Caversham! Do come to us more
often. You know we are always at home on Wednesdays, and
you look so well with your star!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord caversham</span>. Never go
anywhere now. Sick of London Society. Shouldn’t
mind being introduced to my own tailor; he always votes on the
right side. But object strongly to being sent down to
dinner with my wife’s milliner. Never could stand
Lady Caversham’s bonnets.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. Oh, I love
London Society! I think it has immensely improved. It
is entirely composed now of beautiful idiots and brilliant
lunatics. Just what Society should be.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord caversham</span>. Hum!
Which is Goring? Beautiful idiot, or the other thing?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>.
[<i>Gravely</i>.] I have been obliged for the present to
put Lord Goring into a class quite by himself. But he is
developing charmingly!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord caversham</span>. Into
what?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. [<i>With a
little curtsey</i>.] I hope to let you know very soon, Lord
Caversham!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mason</span>. [<i>Announcing
guests</i>.] Lady Markby. Mrs. Cheveley.</p>

<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">lady markby</span>
<i>and</i> <span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. <span class="smcap">lady markby</span> <i>is a pleasant</i>,
<i>kindly</i>, <i>popular woman</i>, <i>with gray hair Ã 
la marquise and good lace</i>. <span class="smcap">mrs.
cheveley</span>, <i>who accompanies her</i>, <i>is tall and
rather slight</i>. <i>Lips very thin and
highly-coloured</i>, <i>a line of scarlet on a pallid
face</i>. <i>Venetian red hair</i>, <i>aquiline nose</i>,
<i>and long throat</i>. <i>Rouge accentuates the natural
paleness of her complexion</i>. <i>Gray-green eyes that
move restlessly</i>. <i>She is in heliotrope</i>, <i>with
diamonds</i>. <i>She looks rather like an orchid</i>,
<i>and makes great demands on one’s curiosity</i>.
<i>In all her movements she is extremely graceful</i>. <i>A
work of art</i>, <i>on the whole</i>, <i>but showing the
influence of too many schools</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. Good evening,
dear Gertrude! So kind of you to let me bring my friend,
Mrs. Cheveley. Two such charming women should know each
other!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. [<i>Advances
towards</i> <span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span> <i>with a
sweet smile</i>. <i>Then suddenly stops</i>, <i>and bows
rather distantly</i>.] I think Mrs. Cheveley and I have met
before. I did not know she had married a second time.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>.
[<i>Genially</i>.] Ah, nowadays people marry as often as
they can, don’t they? It is most fashionable.
[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">duchess of
maryborough</span>.] Dear Duchess, and how is the
Duke? Brain still weak, I suppose? Well, that is only
to be expected, is it not? His good father was just the
same. There is nothing like race, is there?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. [<i>Playing
with her fan</i>.] But have we really met before, Lady
Chiltern? I can’t remember where. I have been
out of England for so long.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. We were at
school together, Mrs. Cheveley.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>
[<i>Superciliously</i>.] Indeed? I have forgotten all
about my schooldays. I have a vague impression that they
were detestable.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>.
[<i>Coldly</i>.] I am not surprised!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. [<i>In her
sweetest manner</i>.] Do you know, I am quite looking
forward to meeting your clever husband, Lady Chiltern.
Since he has been at the Foreign Office, he has been so much
talked of in Vienna. They actually succeed in spelling his
name right in the newspapers. That in itself is fame, on
the continent.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. I hardly think
there will be much in common between you and my husband, Mrs.
Cheveley! [<i>Moves away</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">vicomte de nanjac</span>. Ah!
chère Madame, quelle surprise! I have not seen you
since Berlin!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Not since
Berlin, Vicomte. Five years ago!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">vicomte de nanjac</span>. And you
are younger and more beautiful than ever. How do you manage
it?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. By making it a
rule only to talk to perfectly charming people like yourself.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">vicomte de nanjac</span>. Ah! you
flatter me. You butter me, as they say here.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Do they say
that here? How dreadful of them!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">vicomte de nanjac</span>. Yes, they
have a wonderful language. It should be more widely
known.</p>

<p>[<span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>
<i>enters</i>. <i>A man of forty</i>, <i>but looking
somewhat younger</i>. <i>Clean-shaven</i>, <i>with
finely-cut features</i>, <i>dark-haired and dark-eyed</i>.
<i>A personality of mark</i>. <i>Not popular—few
personalities are</i>. <i>But intensely admired by the
few</i>, <i>and deeply respected by the many</i>. <i>The
note of his manner is that of perfect distinction</i>, <i>with a
slight touch of pride</i>. <i>One feels that he is
conscious of the success he has made in life</i>. <i>A
nervous temperament</i>, <i>with a tired look</i>. <i>The
firmly-chiselled mouth and chin contrast strikingly with the
romantic expression in the deep-set eyes</i>. <i>The
variance is suggestive of an almost complete separation of
passion and intellect</i>, <i>as though thought and emotion were
each isolated in its own sphere through some violence of
will-power</i>. <i>There is nervousness in the
nostrils</i>, <i>and in the pale</i>, <i>thin</i>, <i>pointed
hands</i>. <i>It would be inaccurate to call him
picturesque</i>. <i>Picturesqueness cannot survive the
House of Commons</i>. <i>But Vandyck would have liked to
have painted his head</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Good
evening, Lady Markby! I hope you have brought Sir John with
you?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. Oh! I have
brought a much more charming person than Sir John. Sir
John’s temper since he has taken seriously to politics has
become quite unbearable. Really, now that the House of
Commons is trying to become useful, it does a great deal of
harm.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. I hope
not, Lady Markby. At any rate we do our best to waste the
public time, don’t we? But who is this charming
person you have been kind enough to bring to us?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. Her name is Mrs.
Cheveley! One of the Dorsetshire Cheveleys, I
suppose. But I really don’t know. Families are
so mixed nowadays. Indeed, as a rule, everybody turns out
to be somebody else.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Mrs.
Cheveley? I seem to know the name.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. She has just
arrived from Vienna.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Ah!
yes. I think I know whom you mean.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. Oh! she goes
everywhere there, and has such pleasant scandals about all her
friends. I really must go to Vienna next winter. I
hope there is a good chef at the Embassy.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. If there
is not, the Ambassador will certainly have to be recalled.
Pray point out Mrs. Cheveley to me. I should like to see
her.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. Let me introduce
you. [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">mrs.
cheveley</span>.] My dear, Sir Robert Chiltern is dying to
know you!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Bowing</i>.] Every one is dying to know the brilliant
Mrs. Cheveley. Our attachés at Vienna write to us
about nothing else.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Thank you, Sir
Robert. An acquaintance that begins with a compliment is
sure to develop into a real friendship. It starts in the
right manner. And I find that I know Lady Chiltern
already.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
Really?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Yes. She
has just reminded me that we were at school together. I
remember it perfectly now. She always got the good conduct
prize. I have a distinct recollection of Lady Chiltern
always getting the good conduct prize!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Smiling</i>.] And what prizes did you get, Mrs.
Cheveley?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. My prizes came
a little later on in life. I don’t think any of them
were for good conduct. I forget!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. I am
sure they were for something charming!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. I don’t
know that women are always rewarded for being charming. I
think they are usually punished for it! Certainly, more
women grow old nowadays through the faithfulness of their
admirers than through anything else! At least that is the
only way I can account for the terribly haggard look of most of
your pretty women in London!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. What an
appalling philosophy that sounds! To attempt to classify
you, Mrs. Cheveley, would be an impertinence. But may I
ask, at heart, are you an optimist or a pessimist? Those
seem to be the only two fashionable religions left to us
nowadays.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Oh, I’m
neither. Optimism begins in a broad grin, and Pessimism
ends with blue spectacles. Besides, they are both of them
merely poses.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. You
prefer to be natural?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>.
Sometimes. But it is such a very difficult pose to keep
up.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. What
would those modern psychological novelists, of whom we hear so
much, say to such a theory as that?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Ah! the
strength of women comes from the fact that psychology cannot
explain us. Men can be analysed, women . . . merely
adored.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. You
think science cannot grapple with the problem of women?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Science can
never grapple with the irrational. That is why it has no
future before it, in this world.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. And
women represent the irrational.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Well-dressed
women do.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. [<i>With
a polite bow</i>.] I fear I could hardly agree with you
there. But do sit down. And now tell me, what makes
you leave your brilliant Vienna for our gloomy London—or
perhaps the question is indiscreet?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Questions are
never indiscreet. Answers sometimes are.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Well, at
any rate, may I know if it is politics or pleasure?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Politics are
my only pleasure. You see nowadays it is not fashionable to
flirt till one is forty, or to be romantic till one is
forty-five, so we poor women who are under thirty, or say we are,
have nothing open to us but politics or philanthropy. And
philanthropy seems to me to have become simply the refuge of
people who wish to annoy their fellow-creatures. I prefer
politics. I think they are more . . . becoming!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. A
political life is a noble career!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>.
Sometimes. And sometimes it is a clever game, Sir
Robert. And sometimes it is a great nuisance.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Which do
you find it?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. I? A
combination of all three. [<i>Drops her fan</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Picks up fan</i>.] Allow me!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Thanks.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. But you
have not told me yet what makes you honour London so
suddenly. Our season is almost over.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Oh! I
don’t care about the London season! It is too
matrimonial. People are either hunting for husbands, or
hiding from them. I wanted to meet you. It is quite
true. You know what a woman’s curiosity is.
Almost as great as a man’s! I wanted immensely to
meet you, and . . . to ask you to do something for me.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. I hope
it is not a little thing, Mrs. Cheveley. I find that little
things are so very difficult to do.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. [<i>After a
moment’s reflection</i>.] No, I don’t think it
is quite a little thing.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. I am so
glad. Do tell me what it is.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Later
on. [<i>Rises</i>.] And now may I walk through your
beautiful house? I hear your pictures are charming.
Poor Baron Arnheim—you remember the Baron?—used to
tell me you had some wonderful Corots.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. [<i>With
an almost imperceptible start</i>.] Did you know Baron
Arnheim well?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>.
[<i>Smiling</i>.] Intimately. Did you?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. At one
time.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Wonderful man,
wasn’t he?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>After a pause</i>.] He was very remarkable, in many
ways.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. I often think
it such a pity he never wrote his memoirs. They would have
been most interesting.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Yes: he
knew men and cities well, like the old Greek.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Without the
dreadful disadvantage of having a Penelope waiting at home for
him.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mason</span>. Lord Goring.</p>

<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">lord goring</span>.
<i>Thirty-four</i>, <i>but always says he is younger</i>.
<i>A well-bred</i>, <i>expressionless face</i>. <i>He is
clever</i>, <i>but would not like to be thought so</i>.
<i>A flawless dandy</i>, <i>he would be annoyed if he were
considered romantic</i>. <i>He plays with life</i>, <i>and
is on perfectly good terms with the world</i>. <i>He is
fond of being misunderstood</i>. <i>It gives him a post of
vantage</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Good
evening, my dear Arthur! Mrs. Cheveley, allow me to
introduce to you Lord Goring, the idlest man in London.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. I have met
Lord Goring before.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>.
[<i>Bowing</i>.] I did not think you would remember me,
Mrs. Cheveley.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. My memory is
under admirable control. And are you still a bachelor?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. I . . . believe
so.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. How very
romantic!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Oh! I am not at
all romantic. I am not old enough. I leave romance to
my seniors.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Lord
Goring is the result of Boodle’s Club, Mrs. Cheveley.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. He reflects
every credit on the institution.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. May I ask are
you staying in London long?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. That depends
partly on the weather, partly on the cooking, and partly on Sir
Robert.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. You are
not going to plunge us into a European war, I hope?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. There is no
danger, at present!</p>

<p>[<i>She nods to</i> <span class="smcap">lord goring</span>,
<i>with a look of amusement in her eyes</i>, <i>and goes out
with</i> <span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
<span class="smcap">lord goring</span> <i>saunters over to</i>
<span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. You are very
late!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Have you missed
me?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. Awfully!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Then I am sorry
I did not stay away longer. I like being missed.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. How very
selfish of you!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. I am very
selfish.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. You are
always telling me of your bad qualities, Lord Goring.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. I have only told
you half of them as yet, Miss Mabel!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. Are the
others very bad?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Quite
dreadful! When I think of them at night I go to sleep at
once.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. Well, I
delight in your bad qualities. I wouldn’t have you
part with one of them.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. How very nice of
you! But then you are always nice. By the way, I want
to ask you a question, Miss Mabel. Who brought Mrs.
Cheveley here? That woman in heliotrope, who has just gone
out of the room with your brother?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. Oh, I think
Lady Markby brought her. Why do you ask?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. I haven’t
seen her for years, that is all.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. What an
absurd reason!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. All reasons are
absurd.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. What sort of
a woman is she?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Oh! a genius in
the daytime and a beauty at night!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. I dislike her
already.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. That shows your
admirable good taste.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">vicomte de nanjac</span>.
[<i>Approaching</i>.] Ah, the English young lady is the
dragon of good taste, is she not? Quite the dragon of good
taste.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. So the
newspapers are always telling us.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">vicomte de nanjac</span>. I read all
your English newspapers. I find them so amusing.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Then, my dear
Nanjac, you must certainly read between the lines.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">vicomte de nanjac</span>. I should
like to, but my professor objects. [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>.] May I have the
pleasure of escorting you to the music-room, Mademoiselle?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. [<i>Looking
very disappointed</i>.] Delighted, Vicomte, quite
delighted! [<i>Turning to</i> <span class="smcap">lord
goring</span>.] Aren’t you coming to the
music-room?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Not if there is
any music going on, Miss Mabel.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>.
[<i>Severely</i>.] The music is in German. You would
not understand it.</p>

<p>[<i>Goes out with the</i> <span class="smcap">vicomte de
nanjac</span>. <span class="smcap">lord caversham</span>
<i>comes up to his son</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord caversham</span>. Well, sir!
what are you doing here? Wasting your life as usual!
You should be in bed, sir. You keep too late hours! I
heard of you the other night at Lady Rufford’s dancing till
four o’clock in the morning!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Only a quarter
to four, father.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord caversham</span>. Can’t
make out how you stand London Society. The thing has gone
to the dogs, a lot of damned nobodies talking about nothing.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. I love talking
about nothing, father. It is the only thing I know anything
about.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord caversham</span>. You seem to
me to be living entirely for pleasure.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. What else is
there to live for, father? Nothing ages like happiness.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord caversham</span>. You are
heartless, sir, very heartless!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. I hope not,
father. Good evening, Lady Basildon!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady basildon</span>. [<i>Arching
two pretty eyebrows</i>.] Are you here? I had no idea
you ever came to political parties!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. I adore
political parties. They are the only place left to us where
people don’t talk politics.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady basildon</span>. I delight in
talking politics. I talk them all day long. But I
can’t bear listening to them. I don’t know how
the unfortunate men in the House stand these long debates.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. By never
listening.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady basildon</span>. Really?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. [<i>In his most
serious manner</i>.] Of course. You see, it is a very
dangerous thing to listen. If one listens one may be
convinced; and a man who allows himself to be convinced by an
argument is a thoroughly unreasonable person.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady basildon</span>. Ah! that
accounts for so much in men that I have never understood, and so
much in women that their husbands never appreciate in them!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. marchmont</span>. [<i>With a
sigh</i>.] Our husbands never appreciate anything in
us. We have to go to others for that!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady basildon</span>.
[<i>Emphatically</i>.] Yes, always to others, have we
not?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>.
[<i>Smiling</i>.] And those are the views of the two ladies
who are known to have the most admirable husbands in London.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. marchmont</span>. That is
exactly what we can’t stand. My Reginald is quite
hopelessly faultless. He is really unendurably so, at
times! There is not the smallest element of excitement in
knowing him.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. How
terrible! Really, the thing should be more widely
known!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady basildon</span>. Basildon is
quite as bad; he is as domestic as if he was a bachelor.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. marchmont</span>.
[<i>Pressing</i> <span class="smcap">lady basildon’s</span>
<i>hand</i>.] My poor Olivia! We have married perfect
husbands, and we are well punished for it.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. I should have
thought it was the husbands who were punished.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. marchmont</span>. [<i>Drawing
herself up</i>.] Oh, dear no! They are as happy as
possible! And as for trusting us, it is tragic how much
they trust us.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady basildon</span>. Perfectly
tragic!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Or comic, Lady
Basildon?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady basildon</span>. Certainly not
comic, Lord Goring. How unkind of you to suggest such a
thing!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. marchmont</span>. I am afraid
Lord Goring is in the camp of the enemy, as usual. I saw
him talking to that Mrs. Cheveley when he came in.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Handsome woman,
Mrs. Cheveley!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady basildon</span>.
[<i>Stiffly</i>.] Please don’t praise other women in
our presence. You might wait for us to do that!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. I did wait.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. marchmont</span>. Well, we are
not going to praise her. I hear she went to the Opera on
Monday night, and told Tommy Rufford at supper that, as far as
she could see, London Society was entirely made up of dowdies and
dandies.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. She is quite
right, too. The men are all dowdies and the women are all
dandies, aren’t they?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. marchmont</span>. [<i>After a
pause</i>.] Oh! do you really think that is what Mrs.
Cheveley meant?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Of course.
And a very sensible remark for Mrs. Cheveley to make, too.</p>

<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>.
<i>She joins the group</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. Why are you
talking about Mrs. Cheveley? Everybody is talking about
Mrs. Cheveley! Lord Goring says—what did you say,
Lord Goring, about Mrs. Cheveley? Oh! I remember, that she
was a genius in the daytime and a beauty at night.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady basildon</span>. What a horrid
combination! So very unnatural!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. marchmont</span>. [<i>In her
most dreamy manner</i>.] I like looking at geniuses, and
listening to beautiful people.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Ah! that is
morbid of you, Mrs. Marchmont!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. marchmont</span>.
[<i>Brightening to a look of real pleasure</i>.] I am so
glad to hear you say that. Marchmont and I have been
married for seven years, and he has never once told me that I was
morbid. Men are so painfully unobservant!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady basildon</span>. [<i>Turning to
her</i>.] I have always said, dear Margaret, that you were
the most morbid person in London.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. marchmont</span>. Ah! but you
are always sympathetic, Olivia!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. Is it morbid
to have a desire for food? I have a great desire for
food. Lord Goring, will you give me some supper?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. With pleasure,
Miss Mabel. [<i>Moves away with her</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. How horrid
you have been! You have never talked to me the whole
evening!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. How could
I? You went away with the child-diplomatist.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. You might
have followed us. Pursuit would have been only
polite. I don’t think I like you at all this
evening!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. I like you
immensely.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. Well, I wish
you’d show it in a more marked way! [<i>They go
downstairs</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. marchmont</span>. Olivia, I
have a curious feeling of absolute faintness. I think I
should like some supper very much. I know I should like
some supper.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady basildon</span>. I am
positively dying for supper, Margaret!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. marchmont</span>. Men are so
horribly selfish, they never think of these things.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady basildon</span>. Men are
grossly material, grossly material!</p>

<p>[<i>The</i> <span class="smcap">vicomte de nanjac</span>
<i>enters from the music-room with some other guests</i>.
<i>After having carefully examined all the people present</i>,
<i>he approaches</i> <span class="smcap">lady
basildon</span>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">vicomte de nanjac</span>. May I have
the honour of taking you down to supper, Comtesse?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady basildon</span>.
[<i>Coldly</i>.] I never take supper, thank you,
Vicomte. [<i>The</i> <span class="smcap">vicomte</span>
<i>is about to retire</i>. <span class="smcap">lady
basildon</span>, <i>seeing this</i>, <i>rises at once and takes
his arm</i>.] But I will come down with you with
pleasure.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">vicomte de nanjac</span>. I am so
fond of eating! I am very English in all my tastes.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady basildon</span>. You look quite
English, Vicomte, quite English.</p>

<p>[<i>They pass out</i>. <span class="smcap">mr.
montford</span>, <i>a perfectly groomed young dandy</i>,
<i>approaches</i> <span class="smcap">mrs. marchmont</span>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mr. montford</span>. Like some
supper, Mrs. Marchmont?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. marchmont</span>.
[<i>Languidly</i>.] Thank you, Mr. Montford, I never touch
supper. [<i>Rises hastily and takes his arm</i>.] But
I will sit beside you, and watch you.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mr. montford</span>. I don’t
know that I like being watched when I am eating!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. marchmont</span>. Then I will
watch some one else.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mr. montford</span>. I don’t
know that I should like that either.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. marchmont</span>.
[<i>Severely</i>.] Pray, Mr. Montford, do not make these
painful scenes of jealousy in public!</p>

<p>[<i>They go downstairs with the other guests</i>,
<i>passing</i> <span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>
<i>and</i> <span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>, <i>who now
enter</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. And are
you going to any of our country houses before you leave England,
Mrs. Cheveley?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Oh, no!
I can’t stand your English house-parties. In England
people actually try to be brilliant at breakfast. That is
so dreadful of them! Only dull people are brilliant at
breakfast. And then the family skeleton is always reading
family prayers. My stay in England really depends on you,
Sir Robert. [<i>Sits down on the sofa</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Taking a seat beside her</i>.] Seriously?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Quite
seriously. I want to talk to you about a great political
and financial scheme, about this Argentine Canal Company, in
fact.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. What a
tedious, practical subject for you to talk about, Mrs.
Cheveley!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Oh, I like
tedious, practical subjects. What I don’t like are
tedious, practical people. There is a wide
difference. Besides, you are interested, I know, in
International Canal schemes. You were Lord Radley’s
secretary, weren’t you, when the Government bought the Suez
Canal shares?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
Yes. But the Suez Canal was a very great and splendid
undertaking. It gave us our direct route to India. It
had imperial value. It was necessary that we should have
control. This Argentine scheme is a commonplace Stock
Exchange swindle.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. A speculation,
Sir Robert! A brilliant, daring speculation.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Believe
me, Mrs. Cheveley, it is a swindle. Let us call things by
their proper names. It makes matters simpler. We have
all the information about it at the Foreign Office. In
fact, I sent out a special Commission to inquire into the matter
privately, and they report that the works are hardly begun, and
as for the money already subscribed, no one seems to know what
has become of it. The whole thing is a second Panama, and
with not a quarter of the chance of success that miserable affair
ever had. I hope you have not invested in it. I am
sure you are far too clever to have done that.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. I have
invested very largely in it.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Who
could have advised you to do such a foolish thing?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Your old
friend—and mine.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Who?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Baron
Arnheim.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Frowning</i>.] Ah! yes. I remember hearing, at
the time of his death, that he had been mixed up in the whole
affair.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. It was his
last romance. His last but one, to do him justice.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Rising</i>.] But you have not seen my Corots yet.
They are in the music-room. Corots seem to go with music,
don’t they? May I show them to you?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. [<i>Shaking
her head</i>.] I am not in a mood to-night for silver
twilights, or rose-pink dawns. I want to talk
business. [<i>Motions to him with her fan to sit down again
beside her</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. I fear I
have no advice to give you, Mrs. Cheveley, except to interest
yourself in something less dangerous. The success of the
Canal depends, of course, on the attitude of England, and I am
going to lay the report of the Commissioners before the House
to-morrow night.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. That you must
not do. In your own interests, Sir Robert, to say nothing
of mine, you must not do that.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Looking at her in wonder</i>.] In my own
interests? My dear Mrs. Cheveley, what do you mean?
[<i>Sits down beside her</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Sir Robert, I
will be quite frank with you. I want you to withdraw the
report that you had intended to lay before the House, on the
ground that you have reasons to believe that the Commissioners
have been prejudiced or misinformed, or something. Then I
want you to say a few words to the effect that the Government is
going to reconsider the question, and that you have reason to
believe that the Canal, if completed, will be of great
international value. You know the sort of things ministers
say in cases of this kind. A few ordinary platitudes will
do. In modern life nothing produces such an effect as a
good platitude. It makes the whole world kin. Will
you do that for me?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Mrs.
Cheveley, you cannot be serious in making me such a
proposition!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. I am quite
serious.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Coldly</i>.] Pray allow me to believe that you are
not.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. [<i>Speaking
with great deliberation and emphasis</i>.] Ah! but I
am. And if you do what I ask you, I . . . will pay you very
handsomely!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Pay
me!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Yes.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. I am
afraid I don’t quite understand what you mean.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. [<i>Leaning
back on the sofa and looking at him</i>.] How very
disappointing! And I have come all the way from Vienna in
order that you should thoroughly understand me.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. I fear I
don’t.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. [<i>In her
most nonchalant manner</i>.] My dear Sir Robert, you are a
man of the world, and you have your price, I suppose.
Everybody has nowadays. The drawback is that most people
are so dreadfully expensive. I know I am. I hope you
will be more reasonable in your terms.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Rises indignantly</i>.] If you will allow me, I will
call your carriage for you. You have lived so long abroad,
Mrs. Cheveley, that you seem to be unable to realise that you are
talking to an English gentleman.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. [<i>Detains
him by touching his arm with her fan</i>, <i>and keeping it there
while she is talking</i>.] I realise that I am talking to a
man who laid the foundation of his fortune by selling to a Stock
Exchange speculator a Cabinet secret.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Biting his lip</i>.] What do you mean?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. [<i>Rising and
facing him</i>.] I mean that I know the real origin of your
wealth and your career, and I have got your letter, too.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. What
letter?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>.
[<i>Contemptuously</i>.] The letter you wrote to Baron
Arnheim, when you were Lord Radley’s secretary, telling the
Baron to buy Suez Canal shares—a letter written three days
before the Government announced its own purchase.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Hoarsely</i>.] It is not true.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. You thought
that letter had been destroyed. How foolish of you!
It is in my possession.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. The
affair to which you allude was no more than a speculation.
The House of Commons had not yet passed the bill; it might have
been rejected.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. It was a
swindle, Sir Robert. Let us call things by their proper
names. It makes everything simpler. And now I am
going to sell you that letter, and the price I ask for it is your
public support of the Argentine scheme. You made your own
fortune out of one canal. You must help me and my friends
to make our fortunes out of another!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. It is
infamous, what you propose—infamous!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Oh, no!
This is the game of life as we all have to play it, Sir Robert,
sooner or later!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. I cannot
do what you ask me.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. You mean you
cannot help doing it. You know you are standing on the edge
of a precipice. And it is not for you to make terms.
It is for you to accept them. Supposing you
refuse—</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. What
then?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. My dear Sir
Robert, what then? You are ruined, that is all!
Remember to what a point your Puritanism in England has brought
you. In old days nobody pretended to be a bit better than
his neighbours. In fact, to be a bit better than
one’s neighbour was considered excessively vulgar and
middle-class. Nowadays, with our modern mania for morality,
every one has to pose as a paragon of purity, incorruptibility,
and all the other seven deadly virtues—and what is the
result? You all go over like ninepins—one after the
other. Not a year passes in England without somebody
disappearing. Scandals used to lend charm, or at least
interest, to a man—now they crush him. And yours is a
very nasty scandal. You couldn’t survive it. If it
were known that as a young man, secretary to a great and
important minister, you sold a Cabinet secret for a large sum of
money, and that that was the origin of your wealth and career,
you would be hounded out of public life, you would disappear
completely. And after all, Sir Robert, why should you
sacrifice your entire future rather than deal diplomatically with
your enemy? For the moment I am your enemy. I admit
it! And I am much stronger than you are. The big
battalions are on my side. You have a splendid position,
but it is your splendid position that makes you so
vulnerable. You can’t defend it! And I am in
attack. Of course I have not talked morality to you.
You must admit in fairness that I have spared you that.
Years ago you did a clever, unscrupulous thing; it turned out a
great success. You owe to it your fortune and
position. And now you have got to pay for it. Sooner
or later we have all to pay for what we do. You have to pay
now. Before I leave you to-night, you have got to promise
me to suppress your report, and to speak in the House in favour
of this scheme.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. What you
ask is impossible.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. You must make
it possible. You are going to make it possible. Sir
Robert, you know what your English newspapers are like.
Suppose that when I leave this house I drive down to some
newspaper office, and give them this scandal and the proofs of
it! Think of their loathsome joy, of the delight they would
have in dragging you down, of the mud and mire they would plunge
you in. Think of the hypocrite with his greasy smile
penning his leading article, and arranging the foulness of the
public placard.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
Stop! You want me to withdraw the report and to make a
short speech stating that I believe there are possibilities in
the scheme?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. [<i>Sitting
down on the sofa</i>.] Those are my terms.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. [<i>In a
low voice</i>.] I will give you any sum of money you
want.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Even you are
not rich enough, Sir Robert, to buy back your past. No man
is.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. I will
not do what you ask me. I will not.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. You have
to. If you don’t . . . [<i>Rises from the
sofa</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Bewildered and unnerved</i>.] Wait a moment! What
did you propose? You said that you would give me back my
letter, didn’t you?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Yes.
That is agreed. I will be in the Ladies’ Gallery
to-morrow night at half-past eleven. If by that
time—and you will have had heaps of opportunity—you
have made an announcement to the House in the terms I wish, I
shall hand you back your letter with the prettiest thanks, and
the best, or at any rate the most suitable, compliment I can
think of. I intend to play quite fairly with you. One
should always play fairly . . . when one has the winning
cards. The Baron taught me that . . . amongst other
things.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. You must
let me have time to consider your proposal.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. No; you must
settle now!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Give me
a week—three days!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>.
Impossible! I have got to telegraph to Vienna to-night.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. My God!
what brought you into my life?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>.
Circumstances. [<i>Moves towards the door</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
Don’t go. I consent. The report shall be
withdrawn. I will arrange for a question to be put to me on
the subject.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Thank
you. I knew we should come to an amicable agreement.
I understood your nature from the first. I analysed you,
though you did not adore me. And now you can get my
carriage for me, Sir Robert. I see the people coming up
from supper, and Englishmen always get romantic after a meal, and
that bores me dreadfully. [<i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.]</p>

<p>[<i>Enter Guests</i>, <span class="smcap">lady
chiltern</span>, <span class="smcap">lady markby</span>, <span class="smcap">lord caversham</span>, <span class="smcap">lady
basildon</span>, <span class="smcap">mrs. marchmont</span>, <span class="smcap">vicomte de nanjac</span>, <span class="smcap">mr.
montford</span>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. Well, dear Mrs.
Cheveley, I hope you have enjoyed yourself. Sir Robert is
very entertaining, is he not?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Most
entertaining! I have enjoyed my talk with him
immensely.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. He has had a
very interesting and brilliant career. And he has married a
most admirable wife. Lady Chiltern is a woman of the very
highest principles, I am glad to say. I am a little too old
now, myself, to trouble about setting a good example, but I
always admire people who do. And Lady Chiltern has a very
ennobling effect on life, though her dinner-parties are rather
dull sometimes. But one can’t have everything, can
one? And now I must go, dear. Shall I call for you
to-morrow?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Thanks.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. We might drive
in the Park at five. Everything looks so fresh in the Park
now!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Except the
people!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. Perhaps the
people are a little jaded. I have often observed that the
Season as it goes on produces a kind of softening of the
brain. However, I think anything is better than high
intellectual pressure. That is the most unbecoming thing
there is. It makes the noses of the young girls so
particularly large. And there is nothing so difficult to
marry as a large nose; men don’t like them.
Good-night, dear! [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">lady
chiltern</span>.] Good-night, Gertrude! [<i>Goes out
on</i> <span class="smcap">lord caversham’s</span>
<i>arm</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. What a
charming house you have, Lady Chiltern! I have spent a
delightful evening. It has been so interesting getting to
know your husband.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Why did you
wish to meet my husband, Mrs. Cheveley?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Oh, I will
tell you. I wanted to interest him in this Argentine Canal
scheme, of which I dare say you have heard. And I found him
most susceptible,—susceptible to reason, I mean. A
rare thing in a man. I converted him in ten minutes.
He is going to make a speech in the House to-morrow night in
favour of the idea. We must go to the Ladies’ Gallery
and hear him! It will be a great occasion!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. There must be
some mistake. That scheme could never have my
husband’s support.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Oh, I assure
you it’s all settled. I don’t regret my tedious
journey from Vienna now. It has been a great success.
But, of course, for the next twenty-four hours the whole thing is
a dead secret.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>.
[<i>Gently</i>.] A secret? Between whom?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. [<i>With a
flash of amusement in her eyes</i>.] Between your husband
and myself.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Entering</i>.] Your carriage is here, Mrs.
Cheveley!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Thanks!
Good evening, Lady Chiltern! Good-night, Lord Goring!
I am at Claridge’s. Don’t you think you might
leave a card?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. If you wish it,
Mrs. Cheveley!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Oh,
don’t be so solemn about it, or I shall be obliged to leave
a card on you. In England I suppose that would hardly be
considered en règle. Abroad, we are more
civilised. Will you see me down, Sir Robert? Now that
we have both the same interests at heart we shall be great
friends, I hope!</p>

<p>[<i>Sails out on</i> <span class="smcap">sir robert
chiltern’s</span> <i>arm</i>. <span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span> <i>goes to the top of the
staircase and looks down at them as they descend</i>.
<i>Her expression is troubled</i>. <i>After a little time
she is joined by some of the guests</i>, <i>and passes with them
into another reception-room</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. What a horrid
woman!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. You should go to
bed, Miss Mabel.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. Lord
Goring!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. My father told
me to go to bed an hour ago. I don’t see why I
shouldn’t give you the same advice. I always pass on
good advice. It is the only thing to do with it. It
is never of any use to oneself.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. Lord Goring,
you are always ordering me out of the room. I think it most
courageous of you. Especially as I am not going to bed for
hours. [<i>Goes over to the sofa</i>.] You can come
and sit down if you like, and talk about anything in the world,
except the Royal Academy, Mrs. Cheveley, or novels in Scotch
dialect. They are not improving subjects. [<i>Catches
sight of something that is lying on the sofa half hidden by the
cushion</i>.] What is this? Some one has dropped a
diamond brooch! Quite beautiful, isn’t it?
[<i>Shows it to him</i>.] I wish it was mine, but Gertrude
won’t let me wear anything but pearls, and I am thoroughly
sick of pearls. They make one look so plain, so good and so
intellectual. I wonder whom the brooch belongs to.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. I wonder who
dropped it.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. It is a
beautiful brooch.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. It is a handsome
bracelet.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. It
isn’t a bracelet. It’s a brooch.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. It can be used
as a bracelet. [<i>Takes it from her</i>, <i>and</i>,
<i>pulling out a green letter-case</i>, <i>puts the ornament
carefully in it</i>, <i>and replaces the whole thing in his
breast-pocket with the most perfect sang froid</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. What are you
doing?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Miss Mabel, I am
going to make a rather strange request to you.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>.
[<i>Eagerly</i>.] Oh, pray do! I have been waiting
for it all the evening.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. [<i>Is a little
taken aback</i>, <i>but recovers himself</i>.] Don’t
mention to anybody that I have taken charge of this brooch.
Should any one write and claim it, let me know at once.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. That is a
strange request.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Well, you see I
gave this brooch to somebody once, years ago.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. You did?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Yes.</p>

<p>[<span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span> <i>enters
alone</i>. <i>The other guests have gone</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. Then I shall
certainly bid you good-night. Good-night, Gertrude!
[<i>Exit</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Good-night,
dear! [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">lord
goring</span>.] You saw whom Lady Markby brought here
to-night?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Yes. It
was an unpleasant surprise. What did she come here for?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Apparently to
try and lure Robert to uphold some fraudulent scheme in which she
is interested. The Argentine Canal, in fact.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. She has mistaken
her man, hasn’t she?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. She is
incapable of understanding an upright nature like my
husband’s!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Yes. I
should fancy she came to grief if she tried to get Robert into
her toils. It is extraordinary what astounding mistakes
clever women make.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. I don’t
call women of that kind clever. I call them stupid!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Same thing
often. Good-night, Lady Chiltern!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>.
Good-night!</p>

<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">sir robert
chiltern</span>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. My dear
Arthur, you are not going? Do stop a little!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Afraid I
can’t, thanks. I have promised to look in at the
Hartlocks’. I believe they have got a mauve Hungarian
band that plays mauve Hungarian music. See you soon.
Good-bye!</p>

<p>[<i>Exit</i>]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. How
beautiful you look to-night, Gertrude!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Robert, it is
not true, is it? You are not going to lend your support to
this Argentine speculation? You couldn’t!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Starting</i>.] Who told you I intended to do so?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. That woman who
has just gone out, Mrs. Cheveley, as she calls herself now.
She seemed to taunt me with it. Robert, I know this
woman. You don’t. We were at school
together. She was untruthful, dishonest, an evil influence
on every one whose trust or friendship she could win. I
hated, I despised her. She stole things, she was a
thief. She was sent away for being a thief. Why do
you let her influence you?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
Gertrude, what you tell me may be true, but it happened many
years ago. It is best forgotten! Mrs. Cheveley may
have changed since then. No one should be entirely judged
by their past.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>.
[<i>Sadly</i>.] One’s past is what one is. It
is the only way by which people should be judged.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. That is
a hard saying, Gertrude!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. It is a true
saying, Robert. And what did she mean by boasting that she
had got you to lend your support, your name, to a thing I have
heard you describe as the most dishonest and fraudulent scheme
there has ever been in political life?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Biting his lip</i>.] I was mistaken in the view I
took. We all may make mistakes.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. But you told
me yesterday that you had received the report from the
Commission, and that it entirely condemned the whole thing.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Walking up and down</i>.] I have reasons now to believe
that the Commission was prejudiced, or, at any rate,
misinformed. Besides, Gertrude, public and private life are
different things. They have different laws, and move on
different lines.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. They should
both represent man at his highest. I see no difference
between them.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Stopping</i>.] In the present case, on a matter of
practical politics, I have changed my mind. That is
all.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. All!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Sternly</i>.] Yes!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Robert!
Oh! it is horrible that I should have to ask you such a
question—Robert, are you telling me the whole truth?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Why do
you ask me such a question?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. [<i>After a
pause</i>.] Why do you not answer it?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Sitting down</i>.] Gertrude, truth is a very complex
thing, and politics is a very complex business. There are
wheels within wheels. One may be under certain obligations
to people that one must pay. Sooner or later in political
life one has to compromise. Every one does.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>.
Compromise? Robert, why do you talk so differently to-night
from the way I have always heard you talk? Why are you
changed?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. I am not
changed. But circumstances alter things.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Circumstances
should never alter principles!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. But if I
told you—</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. What?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. That it
was necessary, vitally necessary?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. It can never
be necessary to do what is not honourable. Or if it be
necessary, then what is it that I have loved! But it is
not, Robert; tell me it is not. Why should it be?
What gain would you get? Money? We have no need of
that! And money that comes from a tainted source is a
degradation. Power? But power is nothing in
itself. It is power to do good that is fine—that, and
that only. What is it, then? Robert, tell me why you
are going to do this dishonourable thing!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
Gertrude, you have no right to use that word. I told you it
was a question of rational compromise. It is no more than
that.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Robert, that
is all very well for other men, for men who treat life simply as
a sordid speculation; but not for you, Robert, not for you.
You are different. All your life you have stood apart from
others. You have never let the world soil you. To the
world, as to myself, you have been an ideal always. Oh! be
that ideal still. That great inheritance throw not
away—that tower of ivory do not destroy. Robert, men
can love what is beneath them—things unworthy, stained,
dishonoured. We women worship when we love; and when we
lose our worship, we lose everything. Oh! don’t kill
my love for you, don’t kill that!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
Gertrude!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. I know that
there are men with horrible secrets in their lives—men who
have done some shameful thing, and who in some critical moment
have to pay for it, by doing some other act of shame—oh!
don’t tell me you are such as they are! Robert, is
there in your life any secret dishonour or disgrace? Tell
me, tell me at once, that—</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. That
what?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. [<i>Speaking
very slowly</i>.] That our lives may drift apart.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Drift
apart?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. That they may
be entirely separate. It would be better for us both.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
Gertrude, there is nothing in my past life that you might not
know.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. I was sure of
it, Robert, I was sure of it. But why did you say those
dreadful things, things so unlike your real self?
Don’t let us ever talk about the subject again. You
will write, won’t you, to Mrs. Cheveley, and tell her that
you cannot support this scandalous scheme of hers? If you
have given her any promise you must take it back, that is
all!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Must I
write and tell her that?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Surely,
Robert! What else is there to do?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. I might
see her personally. It would be better.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. You must never
see her again, Robert. She is not a woman you should ever
speak to. She is not worthy to talk to a man like
you. No; you must write to her at once, now, this moment,
and let your letter show her that your decision is quite
irrevocable!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Write
this moment!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Yes.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. But it
is so late. It is close on twelve.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. That makes no
matter. She must know at once that she has been mistaken in
you—and that you are not a man to do anything base or
underhand or dishonourable. Write here, Robert. Write
that you decline to support this scheme of hers, as you hold it
to be a dishonest scheme. Yes—write the word
dishonest. She knows what that word means. [<span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span> <i>sits down and writes
a letter</i>. <i>His wife takes it up and reads
it</i>.] Yes; that will do. [<i>Rings
bell</i>.] And now the envelope. [<i>He writes the
envelope slowly</i>. <i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">mason</span>.] Have this letter sent at once
to Claridge’s Hotel. There is no answer.
[<i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">mason</span>. <span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span> <i>kneels down beside her
husband</i>, <i>and puts her arms around him</i>.] Robert,
love gives one an instinct to things. I feel to-night that
I have saved you from something that might have been a danger to
you, from something that might have made men honour you less than
they do. I don’t think you realise sufficiently,
Robert, that you have brought into the political life of our time
a nobler atmosphere, a finer attitude towards life, a freer air
of purer aims and higher ideals—I know it, and for that I
love you, Robert.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Oh, love
me always, Gertrude, love me always!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. I will love
you always, because you will always be worthy of love. We
needs must love the highest when we see it! [<i>Kisses him
and rises and goes out</i>.]</p>

<p>[<span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span> <i>walks up
and down for a moment</i>; <i>then sits down and buries his face
in his hands</i>. <i>The Servant enters and begins pulling
out the lights</i>. <span class="smcap">sir robert
chiltern</span> <i>looks up</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Put out
the lights, Mason, put out the lights!</p>

<p>[<i>The Servant puts out the lights</i>. <i>The room
becomes almost dark</i>. <i>The only light there is comes
from the great chandelier that hangs over the staircase and
illumines the tapestry of the Triumph of Love</i>.]</p>
