<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
<head>
<title>Second Act</title>
<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
<section id="act-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
<h2>Second Act</h2>


<h2>SECOND ACT</h2>
<h3>SCENE</h3>
<p><i>Morning-room at Sir Robert Chiltern’s house</i>.</p>

<p>[<span class="smcap">lord goring</span>, <i>dressed in the
height of fashion</i>, <i>is lounging in an armchair</i>.
<span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span> <i>is standing in
front of the fireplace</i>. <i>He is evidently in a state
of great mental excitement and distress</i>. <i>As the
scene progresses he paces nervously up and down the
room</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. My dear Robert,
it’s a very awkward business, very awkward indeed.
You should have told your wife the whole thing. Secrets
from other people’s wives are a necessary luxury in modern
life. So, at least, I am always told at the club by people
who are bald enough to know better. But no man should have
a secret from his own wife. She invariably finds it
out. Women have a wonderful instinct about things.
They can discover everything except the obvious.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Arthur,
I couldn’t tell my wife. When could I have told
her? Not last night. It would have made a life-long
separation between us, and I would have lost the love of the one
woman in the world I worship, of the only woman who has ever
stirred love within me. Last night it would have been quite
impossible. She would have turned from me in horror . . .
in horror and in contempt.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Is Lady Chiltern
as perfect as all that?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Yes; my
wife is as perfect as all that.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. [<i>Taking off
his left-hand glove</i>.] What a pity! I beg your
pardon, my dear fellow, I didn’t quite mean that. But
if what you tell me is true, I should like to have a serious talk
about life with Lady Chiltern.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. It would
be quite useless.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. May I try?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Yes; but
nothing could make her alter her views.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Well, at the
worst it would simply be a psychological experiment.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. All such
experiments are terribly dangerous.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Everything is
dangerous, my dear fellow. If it wasn’t so, life
wouldn’t be worth living. . . . Well, I am bound to say
that I think you should have told her years ago.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
When? When we were engaged? Do you think she would
have married me if she had known that the origin of my fortune is
such as it is, the basis of my career such as it is, and that I
had done a thing that I suppose most men would call shameful and
dishonourable?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>.
[<i>Slowly</i>.] Yes; most men would call it ugly
names. There is no doubt of that.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Bitterly</i>.] Men who every day do something of the
same kind themselves. Men who, each one of them, have worse
secrets in their own lives.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. That is the
reason they are so pleased to find out other people’s
secrets. It distracts public attention from their own.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. And,
after all, whom did I wrong by what I did? No one.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. [<i>Looking at
him steadily</i>.] Except yourself, Robert.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>After a pause</i>.] Of course I had private information
about a certain transaction contemplated by the Government of the
day, and I acted on it. Private information is practically
the source of every large modern fortune.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. [<i>Tapping his
boot with his cane</i>.] And public scandal invariably the
result.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Pacing up and down the room</i>.] Arthur, do you think
that what I did nearly eighteen years ago should be brought up
against me now? Do you think it fair that a man’s
whole career should be ruined for a fault done in one’s
boyhood almost? I was twenty-two at the time, and I had the
double misfortune of being well-born and poor, two unforgiveable
things nowadays. Is it fair that the folly, the sin of
one’s youth, if men choose to call it a sin, should wreck a
life like mine, should place me in the pillory, should shatter
all that I have worked for, all that I have built up. Is it
fair, Arthur?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Life is never
fair, Robert. And perhaps it is a good thing for most of us
that it is not.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Every
man of ambition has to fight his century with its own
weapons. What this century worships is wealth. The
God of this century is wealth. To succeed one must have
wealth. At all costs one must have wealth.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. You underrate
yourself, Robert. Believe me, without wealth you could have
succeeded just as well.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. When I
was old, perhaps. When I had lost my passion for power, or
could not use it. When I was tired, worn out,
disappointed. I wanted my success when I was young.
Youth is the time for success. I couldn’t wait.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Well, you
certainly have had your success while you are still young.
No one in our day has had such a brilliant success.
Under-Secretary for Foreign Affairs at the age of
forty—that’s good enough for any one, I should
think.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. And if
it is all taken away from me now? If I lose everything over
a horrible scandal? If I am hounded from public life?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Robert, how
could you have sold yourself for money?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Excitedly</i>.] I did not sell myself for money.
I bought success at a great price. That is all.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>.
[<i>Gravely</i>.] Yes; you certainly paid a great price for
it. But what first made you think of doing such a
thing?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Baron
Arnheim.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Damned
scoundrel!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. No; he
was a man of a most subtle and refined intellect. A man of
culture, charm, and distinction. One of the most
intellectual men I ever met.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Ah! I prefer a
gentlemanly fool any day. There is more to be said for
stupidity than people imagine. Personally I have a great
admiration for stupidity. It is a sort of fellow-feeling, I
suppose. But how did he do it? Tell me the whole
thing.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Throws himself into an armchair by the
writing-table</i>.] One night after dinner at Lord
Radley’s the Baron began talking about success in modern
life as something that one could reduce to an absolutely definite
science. With that wonderfully fascinating quiet voice of
his he expounded to us the most terrible of all philosophies, the
philosophy of power, preached to us the most marvellous of all
gospels, the gospel of gold. I think he saw the effect he
had produced on me, for some days afterwards he wrote and asked
me to come and see him. He was living then in Park Lane, in
the house Lord Woolcomb has now. I remember so well how,
with a strange smile on his pale, curved lips, he led me through
his wonderful picture gallery, showed me his tapestries, his
enamels, his jewels, his carved ivories, made me wonder at the
strange loveliness of the luxury in which he lived; and then told
me that luxury was nothing but a background, a painted scene in a
play, and that power, power over other men, power over the world,
was the one thing worth having, the one supreme pleasure worth
knowing, the one joy one never tired of, and that in our century
only the rich possessed it.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. [<i>With great
deliberation</i>.] A thoroughly shallow creed.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Rising</i>.] I didn’t think so then. I
don’t think so now. Wealth has given me enormous
power. It gave me at the very outset of my life freedom,
and freedom is everything. You have never been poor, and
never known what ambition is. You cannot understand what a
wonderful chance the Baron gave me. Such a chance as few
men get.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Fortunately for
them, if one is to judge by results. But tell me
definitely, how did the Baron finally persuade you to—well,
to do what you did?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. When I
was going away he said to me that if I ever could give him any
private information of real value he would make me a very rich
man. I was dazed at the prospect he held out to me, and my
ambition and my desire for power were at that time
boundless. Six weeks later certain private documents passed
through my hands.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. [<i>Keeping his
eyes steadily fixed on the carpet</i>.] State
documents?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
Yes. [<span class="smcap">lord goring</span> <i>sighs</i>,
<i>then passes his hand across his forehead and looks
up</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. I had no idea
that you, of all men in the world, could have been so weak,
Robert, as to yield to such a temptation as Baron Arnheim held
out to you.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
Weak? Oh, I am sick of hearing that phrase. Sick of
using it about others. Weak? Do you really think,
Arthur, that it is weakness that yields to temptation? I
tell you that there are terrible temptations that it requires
strength, strength and courage, to yield to. To stake all
one’s life on a single moment, to risk everything on one
throw, whether the stake be power or pleasure, I care
not—there is no weakness in that. There is a
horrible, a terrible courage. I had that courage. I
sat down the same afternoon and wrote Baron Arnheim the letter
this woman now holds. He made three-quarters of a million
over the transaction.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. And you?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. I
received from the Baron £110,000.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. You were worth
more, Robert.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. No; that
money gave me exactly what I wanted, power over others. I
went into the House immediately. The Baron advised me in
finance from time to time. Before five years I had almost
trebled my fortune. Since then everything that I have
touched has turned out a success. In all things connected
with money I have had a luck so extraordinary that sometimes it
has made me almost afraid. I remember having read
somewhere, in some strange book, that when the gods wish to
punish us they answer our prayers.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. But tell me,
Robert, did you never suffer any regret for what you had
done?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
No. I felt that I had fought the century with its own
weapons, and won.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>.
[<i>Sadly</i>.] You thought you had won.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. I
thought so. [<i>After a long pause</i>.] Arthur, do
you despise me for what I have told you?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. [<i>With deep
feeling in his voice</i>.] I am very sorry for you, Robert,
very sorry indeed.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. I
don’t say that I suffered any remorse. I
didn’t. Not remorse in the ordinary, rather silly
sense of the word. But I have paid conscience money many
times. I had a wild hope that I might disarm destiny.
The sum Baron Arnheim gave me I have distributed twice over in
public charities since then.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. [<i>Looking
up</i>.] In public charities? Dear me! what a lot of
harm you must have done, Robert!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Oh,
don’t say that, Arthur; don’t talk like that!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Never mind what
I say, Robert! I am always saying what I shouldn’t
say. In fact, I usually say what I really think. A
great mistake nowadays. It makes one so liable to be
misunderstood. As regards this dreadful business, I will
help you in whatever way I can. Of course you know
that.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Thank
you, Arthur, thank you. But what is to be done? What
can be done?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. [<i>Leaning back
with his hands in his pockets</i>.] Well, the English
can’t stand a man who is always saying he is in the right,
but they are very fond of a man who admits that he has been in
the wrong. It is one of the best things in them.
However, in your case, Robert, a confession would not do.
The money, if you will allow me to say so, is . . .
awkward. Besides, if you did make a clean breast of the
whole affair, you would never be able to talk morality
again. And in England a man who can’t talk morality
twice a week to a large, popular, immoral audience is quite over
as a serious politician. There would be nothing left for
him as a profession except Botany or the Church. A
confession would be of no use. It would ruin you.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. It would
ruin me. Arthur, the only thing for me to do now is to
fight the thing out.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. [<i>Rising from
his chair</i>.] I was waiting for you to say that,
Robert. It is the only thing to do now. And you must
begin by telling your wife the whole story.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. That I
will not do.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Robert, believe
me, you are wrong.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. I
couldn’t do it. It would kill her love for me.
And now about this woman, this Mrs. Cheveley. How can I
defend myself against her? You knew her before, Arthur,
apparently.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Yes.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Did you
know her well?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. [<i>Arranging
his necktie</i>.] So little that I got engaged to be
married to her once, when I was staying at the
Tenbys’. The affair lasted for three days . . .
nearly.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Why was
it broken off?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>.
[<i>Airily</i>.] Oh, I forget. At least, it makes no
matter. By the way, have you tried her with money?
She used to be confoundedly fond of money.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. I
offered her any sum she wanted. She refused.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Then the
marvellous gospel of gold breaks down sometimes. The rich
can’t do everything, after all.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Not
everything. I suppose you are right. Arthur, I feel
that public disgrace is in store for me. I feel certain of
it. I never knew what terror was before. I know it
now. It is as if a hand of ice were laid upon one’s
heart. It is as if one’s heart were beating itself to
death in some empty hollow.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. [<i>Striking the
table</i>.] Robert, you must fight her. You must
fight her.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. But
how?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. I can’t
tell you how at present. I have not the smallest
idea. But every one has some weak point. There is
some flaw in each one of us. [<i>Strolls to the fireplace
and looks at himself in the glass</i>.] My father tells me
that even I have faults. Perhaps I have. I
don’t know.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. In
defending myself against Mrs. Cheveley, I have a right to use any
weapon I can find, have I not?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. [<i>Still
looking in the glass</i>.] In your place I don’t
think I should have the smallest scruple in doing so. She
is thoroughly well able to take care of herself.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. [<i>Sits
down at the table and takes a pen in his hand</i>.] Well, I
shall send a cipher telegram to the Embassy at Vienna, to inquire
if there is anything known against her. There may be some
secret scandal she might be afraid of.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. [<i>Settling his
buttonhole</i>.] Oh, I should fancy Mrs. Cheveley is one of
those very modern women of our time who find a new scandal as
becoming as a new bonnet, and air them both in the Park every
afternoon at five-thirty. I am sure she adores scandals,
and that the sorrow of her life at present is that she
can’t manage to have enough of them.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Writing</i>.] Why do you say that?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. [<i>Turning
round</i>.] Well, she wore far too much rouge last night,
and not quite enough clothes. That is always a sign of
despair in a woman.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Striking a bell</i>.] But it is worth while my wiring
to Vienna, is it not?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. It is always
worth while asking a question, though it is not always worth
while answering one.</p>

<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">mason</span>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Is Mr.
Trafford in his room?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mason</span>. Yes, Sir Robert.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. [<i>Puts
what he has written into an envelope</i>, <i>which he then
carefully closes</i>.] Tell him to have this sent off in
cipher at once. There must not be a moment’s
delay.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mason</span>. Yes, Sir Robert.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Oh! just
give that back to me again.</p>

<p>[<i>Writes something on the envelope</i>. <span class="smcap">mason</span> <i>then goes out with the
letter</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. She must
have had some curious hold over Baron Arnheim. I wonder
what it was.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>.
[<i>Smiling</i>.] I wonder.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. I will
fight her to the death, as long as my wife knows nothing.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>.
[<i>Strongly</i>.] Oh, fight in any case—in any
case.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. [<i>With
a gesture of despair</i>.] If my wife found out, there
would be little left to fight for. Well, as soon as I hear
from Vienna, I shall let you know the result. It is a
chance, just a chance, but I believe in it. And as I fought
the age with its own weapons, I will fight her with her
weapons. It is only fair, and she looks like a woman with a
past, doesn’t she?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Most pretty
women do. But there is a fashion in pasts just as there is
a fashion in frocks. Perhaps Mrs. Cheveley’s past is
merely a slightly décolleté one, and they are
excessively popular nowadays. Besides, my dear Robert, I
should not build too high hopes on frightening Mrs.
Cheveley. I should not fancy Mrs. Cheveley is a woman who
would be easily frightened. She has survived all her
creditors, and she shows wonderful presence of mind.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Oh! I
live on hopes now. I clutch at every chance. I feel
like a man on a ship that is sinking. The water is round my
feet, and the very air is bitter with storm. Hush! I hear
my wife’s voice.</p>

<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span> <i>in
walking dress</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Good
afternoon, Lord Goring!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Good afternoon,
Lady Chiltern! Have you been in the Park?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. No; I have
just come from the Woman’s Liberal Association, where, by
the way, Robert, your name was received with loud applause, and
now I have come in to have my tea. [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">lord goring</span>.] You will wait and have
some tea, won’t you?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. I’ll wait
for a short time, thanks.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. I will be back
in a moment. I am only going to take my hat off.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. [<i>In his most
earnest manner</i>.] Oh! please don’t. It is so
pretty. One of the prettiest hats I ever saw. I hope
the Woman’s Liberal Association received it with loud
applause.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. [<i>With a
smile</i>.] We have much more important work to do than
look at each other’s bonnets, Lord Goring.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Really?
What sort of work?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Oh! dull,
useful, delightful things, Factory Acts, Female Inspectors, the
Eight Hours’ Bill, the Parliamentary Franchise. . . .
Everything, in fact, that you would find thoroughly
uninteresting.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. And never
bonnets?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. [<i>With mock
indignation</i>.] Never bonnets, never!</p>

<p>[<span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span> <i>goes out through
the door leading to her boudoir</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Takes</i> <span class="smcap">lord goring’s</span>
<i>hand</i>.] You have been a good friend to me, Arthur, a
thoroughly good friend.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. I don’t
know that I have been able to do much for you, Robert, as
yet. In fact, I have not been able to do anything for you,
as far as I can see. I am thoroughly disappointed with
myself.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. You have
enabled me to tell you the truth. That is something.
The truth has always stifled me.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Ah! the truth is
a thing I get rid of as soon as possible! Bad habit, by the
way. Makes one very unpopular at the club . . . with the
older members. They call it being conceited. Perhaps
it is.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. I would
to God that I had been able to tell the truth . . . to live the
truth. Ah! that is the great thing in life, to live the
truth. [<i>Sighs</i>, <i>and goes towards the
door</i>.] I’ll see you soon again, Arthur,
shan’t I?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Certainly.
Whenever you like. I’m going to look in at the
Bachelors’ Ball to-night, unless I find something better to
do. But I’ll come round to-morrow morning. If
you should want me to-night by any chance, send round a note to
Curzon Street.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Thank
you.</p>

<p>[<i>As he reaches the door</i>, <span class="smcap">lady
chiltern</span> <i>enters from her boudoir</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. You are not
going, Robert?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. I have
some letters to write, dear.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. [<i>Going to
him</i>.] You work too hard, Robert. You seem never
to think of yourself, and you are looking so tired.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. It is
nothing, dear, nothing.</p>

<p>[<i>He kisses her and goes out</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. [<i>To</i>
<span class="smcap">lord goring</span>.] Do sit down.
I am so glad you have called. I want to talk to you about .
. . well, not about bonnets, or the Woman’s Liberal
Association. You take far too much interest in the first
subject, and not nearly enough in the second.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. You want to talk
to me about Mrs. Cheveley?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Yes. You
have guessed it. After you left last night I found out that
what she had said was really true. Of course I made Robert
write her a letter at once, withdrawing his promise.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. So he gave me to
understand.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. To have kept
it would have been the first stain on a career that has been
stainless always. Robert must be above reproach. He
is not like other men. He cannot afford to do what other
men do. [<i>She looks at</i> <span class="smcap">lord
goring</span>, <i>who remains silent</i>.] Don’t you
agree with me? You are Robert’s greatest
friend. You are our greatest friend, Lord Goring. No
one, except myself, knows Robert better than you do. He has
no secrets from me, and I don’t think he has any from
you.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. He certainly has
no secrets from me. At least I don’t think so.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Then am I not
right in my estimate of him? I know I am right. But
speak to me frankly.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. [<i>Looking
straight at her</i>.] Quite frankly?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Surely.
You have nothing to conceal, have you?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Nothing.
But, my dear Lady Chiltern, I think, if you will allow me to say
so, that in practical life—</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>.
[<i>Smiling</i>.] Of which you know so little, Lord
Goring—</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Of which I know
nothing by experience, though I know something by
observation. I think that in practical life there is
something about success, actual success, that is a little
unscrupulous, something about ambition that is unscrupulous
always. Once a man has set his heart and soul on getting to
a certain point, if he has to climb the crag, he climbs the crag;
if he has to walk in the mire—</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Well?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. He walks in the
mire. Of course I am only talking generally about life.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>.
[<i>Gravely</i>.] I hope so. Why do you look at me so
strangely, Lord Goring?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Lady Chiltern, I
have sometimes thought that . . . perhaps you are a little hard
in some of your views on life. I think that . . . often you
don’t make sufficient allowances. In every nature
there are elements of weakness, or worse than weakness.
Supposing, for instance, that—that any public man, my
father, or Lord Merton, or Robert, say, had, years ago, written
some foolish letter to some one . . .</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. What do you
mean by a foolish letter?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. A letter gravely
compromising one’s position. I am only putting an
imaginary case.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Robert is as
incapable of doing a foolish thing as he is of doing a wrong
thing.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. [<i>After a long
pause</i>.] Nobody is incapable of doing a foolish
thing. Nobody is incapable of doing a wrong thing.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Are you a
Pessimist? What will the other dandies say? They will
all have to go into mourning.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>.
[<i>Rising</i>.] No, Lady Chiltern, I am not a
Pessimist. Indeed I am not sure that I quite know what
Pessimism really means. All I do know is that life cannot
be understood without much charity, cannot be lived without much
charity. It is love, and not German philosophy, that is the
true explanation of this world, whatever may be the explanation
of the next. And if you are ever in trouble, Lady Chiltern,
trust me absolutely, and I will help you in every way I
can. If you ever want me, come to me for my assistance, and
you shall have it. Come at once to me.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. [<i>Looking at
him in surprise</i>.] Lord Goring, you are talking quite
seriously. I don’t think I ever heard you talk
seriously before.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>.
[<i>Laughing</i>.] You must excuse me, Lady Chiltern.
It won’t occur again, if I can help it.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. But I like you
to be serious.</p>

<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>, <i>in
the most ravishing frock</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. Dear
Gertrude, don’t say such a dreadful thing to Lord
Goring. Seriousness would be very unbecoming to him.
Good afternoon Lord Goring! Pray be as trivial as you
can.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. I should like
to, Miss Mabel, but I am afraid I am . . . a little out of
practice this morning; and besides, I have to be going now.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. Just when I
have come in! What dreadful manners you have! I am
sure you were very badly brought up.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. I was.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. I wish I had
brought you up!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. I am so sorry
you didn’t.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. It is too
late now, I suppose?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>.
[<i>Smiling</i>.] I am not so sure.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. Will you ride
to-morrow morning?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Yes, at ten.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. Don’t
forget.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Of course I
shan’t. By the way, Lady Chiltern, there is no list
of your guests in <i>The Morning Post</i> of to-day. It has
apparently been crowded out by the County Council, or the Lambeth
Conference, or something equally boring. Could you let me
have a list? I have a particular reason for asking you.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. I am sure Mr.
Trafford will be able to give you one.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Thanks, so
much.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. Tommy is the
most useful person in London.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span> [<i>Turning to
her</i>.] And who is the most ornamental?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>
[<i>Triumphantly</i>.] I am.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. How clever of
you to guess it! [<i>Takes up his hat and cane</i>.]
Good-bye, Lady Chiltern! You will remember what I said to
you, won’t you?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Yes; but I
don’t know why you said it to me.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. I hardly know
myself. Good-bye, Miss Mabel!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span> [<i>With a little
moue of disappointment</i>.] I wish you were not
going. I have had four wonderful adventures this morning;
four and a half, in fact. You might stop and listen to some
of them.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. How very selfish
of you to have four and a half! There won’t be any
left for me.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. I don’t
want you to have any. They would not be good for you.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. That is the
first unkind thing you have ever said to me. How charmingly
you said it! Ten to-morrow.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. Sharp.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. Quite
sharp. But don’t bring Mr. Trafford.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. [<i>With a
little toss of the head</i>.] Of course I shan’t
bring Tommy Trafford. Tommy Trafford is in great
disgrace.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lord goring</span>. I am delighted
to hear it. [<i>Bows and goes out</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. Gertrude, I
wish you would speak to Tommy Trafford.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. What has poor
Mr. Trafford done this time? Robert says he is the best
secretary he has ever had.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. Well, Tommy
has proposed to me again. Tommy really does nothing but
propose to me. He proposed to me last night in the
music-room, when I was quite unprotected, as there was an
elaborate trio going on. I didn’t dare to make the
smallest repartee, I need hardly tell you. If I had, it
would have stopped the music at once. Musical people are so
absurdly unreasonable. They always want one to be perfectly
dumb at the very moment when one is longing to be absolutely
deaf. Then he proposed to me in broad daylight this
morning, in front of that dreadful statue of Achilles.
Really, the things that go on in front of that work of art are
quite appalling. The police should interfere. At
luncheon I saw by the glare in his eye that he was going to
propose again, and I just managed to check him in time by
assuring him that I was a bimetallist. Fortunately I
don’t know what bimetallism means. And I don’t
believe anybody else does either. But the observation
crushed Tommy for ten minutes. He looked quite
shocked. And then Tommy is so annoying in the way he
proposes. If he proposed at the top of his voice, I should
not mind so much. That might produce some effect on the
public. But he does it in a horrid confidential way.
When Tommy wants to be romantic he talks to one just like a
doctor. I am very fond of Tommy, but his methods of
proposing are quite out of date. I wish, Gertrude, you
would speak to him, and tell him that once a week is quite often
enough to propose to any one, and that it should always be done
in a manner that attracts some attention.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Dear Mabel,
don’t talk like that. Besides, Robert thinks very
highly of Mr. Trafford. He believes he has a brilliant
future before him.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. Oh! I
wouldn’t marry a man with a future before him for anything
under the sun.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Mabel!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. I know,
dear. You married a man with a future, didn’t
you? But then Robert was a genius, and you have a noble,
self-sacrificing character. You can stand geniuses. I
have no character at all, and Robert is the only genius I could
ever bear. As a rule, I think they are quite
impossible. Geniuses talk so much, don’t they?
Such a bad habit! And they are always thinking about
themselves, when I want them to be thinking about me. I
must go round now and rehearse at Lady Basildon’s.
You remember, we are having tableaux, don’t you? The
Triumph of something, I don’t know what! I hope it
will be triumph of me. Only triumph I am really interested
in at present. [<i>Kisses</i> <span class="smcap">lady
chiltern</span> <i>and goes out</i>; <i>then comes running
back</i>.] Oh, Gertrude, do you know who is coming to see
you? That dreadful Mrs. Cheveley, in a most lovely
gown. Did you ask her?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>.
[<i>Rising</i>.] Mrs. Cheveley! Coming to see
me? Impossible!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. I assure you
she is coming upstairs, as large as life and not nearly so
natural.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. You need not
wait, Mabel. Remember, Lady Basildon is expecting you.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. Oh! I must
shake hands with Lady Markby. She is delightful. I
love being scolded by her.</p>

<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">mason</span>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mason</span>. Lady Markby.
Mrs. Cheveley.</p>

<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">lady markby</span>
<i>and</i> <span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. [<i>Advancing
to meet them</i>.] Dear Lady Markby, how nice of you to
come and see me! [<i>Shakes hands with her</i>, <i>and bows
somewhat distantly to</i> <span class="smcap">mrs.
cheveley</span>.] Won’t you sit down, Mrs.
Cheveley?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Thanks.
Isn’t that Miss Chiltern? I should like so much to
know her.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Mabel, Mrs.
Cheveley wishes to know you.</p>

<p>[<span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span> <i>gives a little
nod</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span> [<i>Sitting
down</i>.] I thought your frock so charming last night,
Miss Chiltern. So simple and . . . suitable.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. Really?
I must tell my dressmaker. It will be such a surprise to
her. Good-bye, Lady Markby!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. Going
already?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. I am so sorry
but I am obliged to. I am just off to rehearsal. I
have got to stand on my head in some tableaux.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. On your head,
child? Oh! I hope not. I believe it is most
unhealthy. [<i>Takes a seat on the sofa next</i> <span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. But it is for
an excellent charity: in aid of the Undeserving, the only people
I am really interested in. I am the secretary, and Tommy
Trafford is treasurer.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. And what is
Lord Goring?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. Oh! Lord
Goring is president.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. The post
should suit him admirably, unless he has deteriorated since I
knew him first.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>.
[<i>Reflecting</i>.] You are remarkably modern,
Mabel. A little too modern, perhaps. Nothing is so
dangerous as being too modern. One is apt to grow
old-fashioned quite suddenly. I have known many instances
of it.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. What a
dreadful prospect!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. Ah! my dear, you
need not be nervous. You will always be as pretty as
possible. That is the best fashion there is, and the only
fashion that England succeeds in setting.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mabel chiltern</span>. [<i>With a
curtsey</i>.] Thank you so much, Lady Markby, for England .
. . and myself. [<i>Goes out</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. [<i>Turning
to</i> <span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>.] Dear
Gertrude, we just called to know if Mrs. Cheveley’s diamond
brooch has been found.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Here?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Yes. I
missed it when I got back to Claridge’s, and I thought I
might possibly have dropped it here.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. I have heard
nothing about it. But I will send for the butler and
ask. [<i>Touches the bell</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Oh, pray
don’t trouble, Lady Chiltern. I dare say I lost it at
the Opera, before we came on here.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. Ah yes, I
suppose it must have been at the Opera. The fact is, we all
scramble and jostle so much nowadays that I wonder we have
anything at all left on us at the end of an evening. I know
myself that, when I am coming back from the Drawing Room, I
always feel as if I hadn’t a shred on me, except a small
shred of decent reputation, just enough to prevent the lower
classes making painful observations through the windows of the
carriage. The fact is that our Society is terribly
over-populated. Really, some one should arrange a proper
scheme of assisted emigration. It would do a great deal of
good.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. I quite agree
with you, Lady Markby. It is nearly six years since I have
been in London for the Season, and I must say Society has become
dreadfully mixed. One sees the oddest people
everywhere.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. That is quite
true, dear. But one needn’t know them.
I’m sure I don’t know half the people who come to my
house. Indeed, from all I hear, I shouldn’t like
to.</p>

<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">mason</span>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. What sort of a
brooch was it that you lost, Mrs. Cheveley?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. A diamond
snake-brooch with a ruby, a rather large ruby.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. I thought you
said there was a sapphire on the head, dear?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>
[<i>Smiling</i>.] No, lady Markby—a ruby.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. [<i>Nodding her
head</i>.] And very becoming, I am quite sure.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Has a ruby and
diamond brooch been found in any of the rooms this morning,
Mason?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mason</span>. No, my lady.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. It really is
of no consequence, Lady Chiltern. I am so sorry to have put
you to any inconvenience.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>.
[<i>Coldly</i>.] Oh, it has been no inconvenience.
That will do, Mason. You can bring tea.</p>

<p>[<i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">mason</span>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. Well, I must say
it is most annoying to lose anything. I remember once at
Bath, years ago, losing in the Pump Room an exceedingly handsome
cameo bracelet that Sir John had given me. I don’t
think he has ever given me anything since, I am sorry to
say. He has sadly degenerated. Really, this horrid
House of Commons quite ruins our husbands for us. I think
the Lower House by far the greatest blow to a happy married life
that there has been since that terrible thing called the Higher
Education of Women was invented.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Ah! it is
heresy to say that in this house, Lady Markby. Robert is a
great champion of the Higher Education of Women, and so, I am
afraid, am I.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. The higher
education of men is what I should like to see. Men need it
so sadly.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. They do,
dear. But I am afraid such a scheme would be quite
unpractical. I don’t think man has much capacity for
development. He has got as far as he can, and that is not
far, is it? With regard to women, well, dear Gertrude, you
belong to the younger generation, and I am sure it is all right
if you approve of it. In my time, of course, we were taught
not to understand anything. That was the old system, and
wonderfully interesting it was. I assure you that the
amount of things I and my poor dear sister were taught not to
understand was quite extraordinary. But modern women
understand everything, I am told.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Except their
husbands. That is the one thing the modern woman never
understands.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. And a very good
thing too, dear, I dare say. It might break up many a happy
home if they did. Not yours, I need hardly say,
Gertrude. You have married a pattern husband. I wish
I could say as much for myself. But since Sir John has
taken to attending the debates regularly, which he never used to
do in the good old days, his language has become quite
impossible. He always seems to think that he is addressing
the House, and consequently whenever he discusses the state of
the agricultural labourer, or the Welsh Church, or something
quite improper of that kind, I am obliged to send all the
servants out of the room. It is not pleasant to see
one’s own butler, who has been with one for twenty-three
years, actually blushing at the side-board, and the footmen
making contortions in corners like persons in circuses. I
assure you my life will be quite ruined unless they send John at
once to the Upper House. He won’t take any interest
in politics then, will he? The House of Lords is so
sensible. An assembly of gentlemen. But in his
present state, Sir John is really a great trial. Why, this
morning before breakfast was half over, he stood up on the
hearthrug, put his hands in his pockets, and appealed to the
country at the top of his voice. I left the table as soon
as I had my second cup of tea, I need hardly say. But his
violent language could be heard all over the house! I
trust, Gertrude, that Sir Robert is not like that?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. But I am very
much interested in politics, Lady Markby. I love to hear
Robert talk about them.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. Well, I hope he
is not as devoted to Blue Books as Sir John is. I
don’t think they can be quite improving reading for any
one.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>
[<i>Languidly</i>.] I have never read a Blue Book. I
prefer books . . . in yellow covers.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. [<i>Genially
unconscious</i>.] Yellow is a gayer colour, is it
not? I used to wear yellow a good deal in my early days,
and would do so now if Sir John was not so painfully personal in
his observations, and a man on the question of dress is always
ridiculous, is he not?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Oh, no!
I think men are the only authorities on dress.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. Really?
One wouldn’t say so from the sort of hats they wear? would
one?</p>

<p>[<i>The butler enters</i>, <i>followed by the
footman</i>. <i>Tea is set on a small table close to</i>
<span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. May I give you
some tea, Mrs. Cheveley?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Thanks.
[<i>The butler hands</i> <span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>
<i>a cup of tea on a salver</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Some tea, Lady
Markby?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. No thanks,
dear. [<i>The servants go out</i>.] The fact is, I
have promised to go round for ten minutes to see poor Lady
Brancaster, who is in very great trouble. Her daughter,
quite a well-brought-up girl, too, has actually become engaged to
be married to a curate in Shropshire. It is very sad, very
sad indeed. I can’t understand this modern mania for
curates. In my time we girls saw them, of course, running
about the place like rabbits. But we never took any notice
of them, I need hardly say. But I am told that nowadays
country society is quite honeycombed with them. I think it
most irreligious. And then the eldest son has quarrelled
with his father, and it is said that when they meet at the club
Lord Brancaster always hides himself behind the money article in
<i>The Times</i>. However, I believe that is quite a common
occurrence nowadays and that they have to take in extra copies of
<i>The Times</i> at all the clubs in St. James’s Street;
there are so many sons who won’t have anything to do with
their fathers, and so many fathers who won’t speak to their
sons. I think myself, it is very much to be regretted.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. So do I.
Fathers have so much to learn from their sons nowadays.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. Really,
dear? What?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. The art of
living. The only really Fine Art we have produced in modern
times.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. [<i>Shaking her
head</i>.] Ah! I am afraid Lord Brancaster knew a
good deal about that. More than his poor wife ever
did. [<i>Turning to</i> <span class="smcap">lady
chiltern</span>.] You know Lady Brancaster, don’t
you, dear?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Just
slightly. She was staying at Langton last autumn, when we
were there.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. Well, like all
stout women, she looks the very picture of happiness, as no doubt
you noticed. But there are many tragedies in her family,
besides this affair of the curate. Her own sister, Mrs.
Jekyll, had a most unhappy life; through no fault of her own, I
am sorry to say. She ultimately was so broken-hearted that
she went into a convent, or on to the operatic stage, I forget
which. No; I think it was decorative art-needlework she
took up. I know she had lost all sense of pleasure in
life. [<i>Rising</i>.] And now, Gertrude, if you will
allow me, I shall leave Mrs. Cheveley in your charge and call
back for her in a quarter of an hour. Or perhaps, dear Mrs.
Cheveley, you wouldn’t mind waiting in the carriage while I
am with Lady Brancaster. As I intend it to be a visit of
condolence, I shan’t stay long.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>
[<i>Rising</i>.] I don’t mind waiting in the carriage
at all, provided there is somebody to look at one.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. Well, I hear the
curate is always prowling about the house.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. I am afraid I
am not fond of girl friends.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>
[<i>Rising</i>.] Oh, I hope Mrs. Cheveley will stay here a
little. I should like to have a few minutes’
conversation with her.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. How very kind
of you, Lady Chiltern! Believe me, nothing would give me
greater pleasure.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. Ah! no doubt you
both have many pleasant reminiscences of your schooldays to talk
over together. Good-bye, dear Gertrude! Shall I see
you at Lady Bonar’s to-night? She has discovered a
wonderful new genius. He does . . . nothing at all, I
believe. That is a great comfort, is it not?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Robert and I
are dining at home by ourselves to-night, and I don’t think
I shall go anywhere afterwards. Robert, of course, will
have to be in the House. But there is nothing interesting
on.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady markby</span>. Dining at home
by yourselves? Is that quite prudent? Ah, I forgot,
your husband is an exception. Mine is the general rule, and
nothing ages a woman so rapidly as having married the general
rule. [<i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">lady
markby</span>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Wonderful
woman, Lady Markby, isn’t she? Talks more and says
less than anybody I ever met. She is made to be a public
speaker. Much more so than her husband, though he is a
typical Englishman, always dull and usually violent.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. [<i>Makes no
answer</i>, <i>but remains standing</i>. <i>There is a
pause</i>. <i>Then the eyes of the two women
meet</i>. <span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span> <i>looks
stern and pale</i>. <span class="smcap">mrs.
cheveley</span> <i>seem rather amused</i>.] Mrs. Cheveley,
I think it is right to tell you quite frankly that, had I known
who you really were, I should not have invited you to my house
last night.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span> [<i>With an
impertinent smile</i>.] Really?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. I could not
have done so.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. I see that
after all these years you have not changed a bit, Gertrude.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. I never
change.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span> [<i>Elevating her
eyebrows</i>.] Then life has taught you nothing?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. It has taught
me that a person who has once been guilty of a dishonest and
dishonourable action may be guilty of it a second time, and
should be shunned.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Would you
apply that rule to every one?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Yes, to every
one, without exception.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Then I am
sorry for you, Gertrude, very sorry for you.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. You see now, I
was sure, that for many reasons any further acquaintance between
us during your stay in London is quite impossible?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span> [<i>Leaning back in
her chair</i>.] Do you know, Gertrude, I don’t mind
your talking morality a bit. Morality is simply the
attitude we adopt towards people whom we personally
dislike. You dislike me. I am quite aware of
that. And I have always detested you. And yet I have
come here to do you a service.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>.
[<i>Contemptuously</i>.] Like the service you wished to
render my husband last night, I suppose. Thank heaven, I
saved him from that.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. [<i>Starting
to her feet</i>.] It was you who made him write that
insolent letter to me? It was you who made him break his
promise?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Yes.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Then you must
make him keep it. I give you till to-morrow
morning—no more. If by that time your husband does
not solemnly bind himself to help me in this great scheme in
which I am interested—</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. This
fraudulent speculation—</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Call it what
you choose. I hold your husband in the hollow of my hand,
and if you are wise you will make him do what I tell him.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. [<i>Rising and
going towards her</i>.] You are impertinent. What has
my husband to do with you? With a woman like you?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span> [<i>With a bitter
laugh</i>.] In this world like meets with like. It is
because your husband is himself fraudulent and dishonest that we
pair so well together. Between you and him there are
chasms. He and I are closer than friends. We are
enemies linked together. The same sin binds us.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. How dare you
class my husband with yourself? How dare you threaten him
or me? Leave my house. You are unfit to enter it.</p>

<p>[<span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span> <i>enters from
behind</i>. <i>He hears his wife’s last words</i>,
<i>and sees to whom they are addressed</i>. <i>He grows
deadly pale</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. Your
house! A house bought with the price of dishonour. A
house, everything in which has been paid for by fraud.
[<i>Turns round and sees</i> <span class="smcap">sir robert
chiltern</span>.] Ask him what the origin of his fortune
is! Get him to tell you how he sold to a stockbroker a
Cabinet secret. Learn from him to what you owe your
position.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. It is not
true! Robert! It is not true!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. [<i>Pointing
at him with outstretched finger</i>.] Look at him!
Can he deny it? Does he dare to?</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
Go! Go at once. You have done your worst now.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span>. My
worst? I have not yet finished with you, with either of
you. I give you both till to-morrow at noon. If by
then you don’t do what I bid you to do, the whole world
shall know the origin of Robert Chiltern.</p>

<p>[<span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span> <i>strikes the
bell</i>. <i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">mason</span>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. Show
Mrs. Cheveley out.</p>

<p>[<span class="smcap">mrs. cheveley</span> <i>starts</i>;
<i>then bows with somewhat exaggerated politeness to</i> <span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>, <i>who makes no sign of
response</i>. <i>As she passes by</i> <span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>, <i>who is standing
close to the door</i>, <i>she pauses for a moment and looks him
straight in the face</i>. <i>She then goes out</i>,
<i>followed by the servant</i>, <i>who closes the door after
him</i>. <i>The husband and wife are left alone</i>.
<span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span> <i>stands like some one
in a dreadful dream</i>. <i>Then she turns round and looks
at her husband</i>. <i>She looks at him with strange
eyes</i>, <i>as though she were seeing him for the first
time</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. You sold a
Cabinet secret for money! You began your life with
fraud! You built up your career on dishonour! Oh,
tell me it is not true! Lie to me! Lie to me!
Tell me it is not true!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. What
this woman said is quite true. But, Gertrude, listen to
me. You don’t realise how I was tempted. Let me
tell you the whole thing. [<i>Goes towards her</i>.]</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. Don’t
come near me. Don’t touch me. I feel as if you
had soiled me for ever. Oh! what a mask you have been
wearing all these years! A horrible painted mask! You
sold yourself for money. Oh! a common thief were
better. You put yourself up to sale to the highest
bidder! You were bought in the market. You lied to
the whole world. And yet you will not lie to me.</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>.
[<i>Rushing towards her</i>.] Gertrude! Gertrude!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span>. [<i>Thrusting
him back with outstretched hands</i>.] No, don’t
speak! Say nothing! Your voice wakes terrible
memories—memories of things that made me love
you—memories of words that made me love you—memories
that now are horrible to me. And how I worshipped
you! You were to me something apart from common life, a
thing pure, noble, honest, without stain. The world seemed
to me finer because you were in it, and goodness more real
because you lived. And now—oh, when I think that I
made of a man like you my ideal! the ideal of my life!</p>

<p><span class="smcap">sir robert chiltern</span>. There
was your mistake. There was your error. The error all
women commit. Why can’t you women love us, faults and
all? Why do you place us on monstrous pedestals? We
have all feet of clay, women as well as men; but when we men love
women, we love them knowing their weaknesses, their follies,
their imperfections, love them all the more, it may be, for that
reason. It is not the perfect, but the imperfect, who have
need of love. It is when we are wounded by our own hands,
or by the hands of others, that love should come to cure
us—else what use is love at all? All sins, except a
sin against itself, Love should forgive. All lives, save
loveless lives, true Love should pardon. A man’s love
is like that. It is wider, larger, more human than a
woman’s. Women think that they are making ideals of
men. What they are making of us are false idols
merely. You made your false idol of me, and I had not the
courage to come down, show you my wounds, tell you my
weaknesses. I was afraid that I might lose your love, as I
have lost it now. And so, last night you ruined my life for
me—yes, ruined it! What this woman asked of me was
nothing compared to what she offered to me. She offered
security, peace, stability. The sin of my youth, that I had
thought was buried, rose up in front of me, hideous, horrible,
with its hands at my throat. I could have killed it for
ever, sent it back into its tomb, destroyed its record, burned
the one witness against me. You prevented me. No one
but you, you know it. And now what is there before me but
public disgrace, ruin, terrible shame, the mockery of the world,
a lonely dishonoured life, a lonely dishonoured death, it may be,
some day? Let women make no more ideals of men! let them
not put them on alters and bow before them, or they may ruin
other lives as completely as you—you whom I have so wildly
loved—have ruined mine!</p>

<p>[<i>He passes from the room</i>. <span class="smcap">lady chiltern</span> <i>rushes towards him</i>,
<i>but the door is closed when she reaches it</i>. <i>Pale
with anguish</i>, <i>bewildered</i>, <i>helpless</i>, <i>she
sways like a plant in the water</i>. <i>Her hands</i>,
<i>outstretched</i>, <i>seem to tremble in the air like blossoms
in the mind</i>. <i>Then she flings herself down beside a
sofa and buries her face</i>. <i>Her sobs are like the sobs
of a child</i>.]</p>
<p style="text-align: center"><span class="smcap">Act
Drop</span></p>
